I haven't published anything for a while because my mind has been in other places creatively and intellectually, but ultimately life just gets in the way. As my driving instructor says "Life is unfair, Tim. Entropy prevails."

I first took up photography as a teenager because I thought it was easy, or had the appearance of something that was easy. My early explorations were with a compact digital camera so I didn't have to wait for the result, but I pushed my Dad's compact camera to its limits. I took photographs of everything including, much later, people. In fact I wrote to Alec Soth as a teenager asking for his advice on photographing strangers and he very kindly sent back some of his zines telling me, "**TODO**". As I grew to become really quite technically proficient with photography, I knew there was a gulf between what I could produce and the work of some of the other young photographers I admired at the time (Olivia Bee comes to mind.) I knew that in order to create photographs that truly resonated with other people, I needed to photograph people and to connect with my subjects. There's a stunning photograph of a young couple in Vanessa Winship's "She Dances on Jackson" forever imprinted on my brain; their expressions tell us so much. To connect with your subject matter requires a considerable amount of time (and enough money to get by) neither of which I had at the time. I wanted to be a photographer but knew my father wouldn't let me; I instead took a stab at becoming a camera man for TV and failed.

In his Masterclass the poet Billy Collins says "What you have to do in your poetry is tell a little white lie... that you love poetry more than you love yourself".

I think most people, to spend any considerable time doing something, must believe they're good at it. It's rare to slog away at something for years thinking you're bad at it. But then again, many creative processes are inherently fun. I'm not the best painter but I enjoy applying paint to canvas, mixing colours and textures.

I think programming is the opposite. Most people who don't write code perceive it to be some incredibly complex skill but most of us with a couple of years experience know there are simple patterns. I used to work with a guy who insisted on using a green and black terminal theme (it was probably just defauly iTerm) because non-technical coworkers would walk past his desk and jokingly say things like "are you in the Matrix?" even though I knew he was just doing trivial git stuff. Funnily enough, thinking programming was "what smart people do" is one of the reasons I took it up in the first place; I had watched "The Internship" with Owen Wilson and Vince Vaugn and decided I was going to learn how to code and work at Google. Oh to be young and naïve. I've met lots of stupid people who code but most are unsurprisingly pretty clever.

There's a view in literature that the story dictates the form of the novel; it's important to choose a viewpoint that suits the subject matter best. But so many first-time novelists choose to write in the first person because their own perspective is the only one they know; editors and literary agents see their work as self-indulgent. In photography, the book "TTP" by Hayahisa Tomiyasu comes to mind: its style and design (its form) is informed by the nature of its photographs and subject matter.