Much of my thinking at the moment is framed by relativism. I find it very difficult to see absolutes in a world that's so constantly in flux, where truth and opinion regularly flow in and out of one another. The position of the frame is very important: close up, things we observe can appear true - an apple falls from a tree. Take a thousand steps back and everything, whether it be the language I'm using to communicate with you now, or gravity, can only be seen through the frame of human understanding; In fact everything in our _known_ universe can be framed like this. This is a contradiction itself: to say that everything pertains to human understanding is an absolute statement, which is a popular criticism of relativism. You'll find many such assertions in this post.

Some things must be true or at least in a relativistic sense we must _consider_ them to be true if we're to have any understanding of the universe. We create "footholds" in our knowledge: things we assume to be true, without really ever delving into. It's more convenient to think this way. For example, we're told and understand time (here on Earth) passes at a constant rate, but regularly our perception of it changes how fast it appears to go. So time in this sense could relative to our perception of it. And so I think we use truths or absolutes for convenience, to communicate, because describing everything relative to other things would be very slow and inefficient. So we attribute words to objects and experiences for convenience because we can't communicate telepathically. It might be useless to think about truth in this way, in the same way it's not pertinent to think about what came before time (or at least our perception of it). If you'll forgive the slight digression, Hawking said:

> "Since events before the Big Bang have no observational consequences, one may as well cut them out of the theory, and say that time began at the Big Bang. Events before the Big Bang, are simply not defined, because there's no way one could measure what happened at them."

Truth: "...that which is true or in accordance with fact or reality".

But we know from recent world events that our sense of reality can easily be distorted, and there seems to be a lot of abuse of truth going round lately (especially in popular media). Widespread collective opinion seems to be branded as "truth" [if you can get enough people](/embracing-the-heterodox/) to say it publicly. I find this very troubling.

After writing the first draft of this post, BBC news posted [an opinion piece](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-63049044) by one of their journalists Faisal Islam. The title read "Kwasi Kwarteng faces U-turn on tax or spending cuts", except at this point in time there had been no U-turn. In fact, later the Conservative government reiterated they had no intention of doing so. If you read the comments on the article you'll see that most commenters did't seem to understand this was opinion and (aside from the journalist's face and name at the top of the page) there's nothing to indicate otherwise. If you look at the websites of several leading British newspapers (The Guardian, The Times, The Telegraph), you'll see the "opinion" or "comment" sections clearly demarcated, but it seems that the BBC _don't mind_ readers taking Faisal's opinions to be true - this was the second-most-viewed piece on the day it was published. I found this incredibly annoying; that for all BBC news do to "fact check" other stories by other news outlets and public persons, they were more than happy to misrepresent the truth. It highlighted something else for me: there is great importance in knowing the Truth, despite our many perceived individual "truths".

Is everything perceived? There are 7 billion humans on this planet all thinking different things at the same time. How does one capture collective conscience? How do we agree on anything or get anything done?

Take love, which forms the basis of so much of our culture and understanding. Love is a perceptual experience (which isn't to say that it's not real) because our idea of what it means varies so wildly, influenced by so many other perceptions. It can be framed as: high levels of dopamine and norepinephrine in the brain, or as romanticised in art and music. But love is the basis of romantic relationships, sometimes marriage and procreation. How the hell do we do all of that on such an unstable foundation?
