In December last year I set a goal of meditating every day for six months. I'm not exactly sure what I'd hoped I might achieve but I'd read that meditation was a great way to overcome anxiety and I'd been struggling with anxiety before my driving lessons. I had also read that meditation [can improve focus](https://www.vox.com/2015/8/27/9214697/meditation-brain-neuroscience). Incidentally, I'm pleased to say that I passed my driving test (first time) in May.

Since I had no previous experience, I turned to some of the popular apps and tried several but the one I most liked (and still use today) is [Balance](https://balanceapp.com). Given that I use it for nearly all of my meditations, I'll talk about it briefly. Balance asks you questions about how you think your practice is going. It uses this to create somewhat-custom sessions (but the voice isn't robotic-sounding). I found their "plans" (courses of ten daily meditations) easy to follow; I'm currently on the "Advanced IV" having completed Foundations I-V and Advanced I-III. Sometimes I throw in other "singles" on the topics of gratitude (my personal favourite), positivity and self esteem.

Talking about meditation can sound a bit "preachy". It's absolutely fine if you don't get it (neither did I at first) but I've felt real improvements in some aspects of my life and I want to talk about some of my anecdotal experiences with it. While I think it's very easy in this day-and-age to find links between totally unrelated things, I'll try to only talk about effects I _know_ were the direct consequence of meditation.

**Most significantly of all meditation helped me relax** as if I'd never truly known relaxation. Sometimes I was so still and my focus so heightened I could feel only my heartbeat and then half a second later in the tops my thighs (something I'd never experienced before). Much of the anxiety I felt before my driving lessons like the wrist shakes and the anxious leg spasms went away. Ten minutes of meditation could help me feel calm for thirty minutes to an hour. As it became a more central part of my day I found it easier to settle my mind and body.

**Soon I felt greater awareness of my body and surroundings**. In January I was going to meeting a friend for lunch. It was cold and so I was wearing several layers but walking briskly through the park I'd worked up a sweat. I stopped in my tracks, acknowledged how my body felt: the feeling of cold air on my hot sweaty forehead, my warm chest and arms, my tired legs, the soft balls of my feet pressing into the ground. Why was I walking so quickly, such that my body was uncomfortable? I had ample time; There was simply no need. I dawdled through the park appreciating my surroundings. It felt cathartic; my body cooled.

On many occasions I've been walking from A to B and realise how completely wrapped up in my own thoughts I am, such that I pay no attention to what's going on around me. When was the last time you looked up at the clouds with curiosity? Initially I would have to pay attention to specific things on their own (sounds, colours, light, feelings in various parts of my body etc) but in time built a greater sense of lots of things at once.

**I became less judgemental and more grateful**.

**I felt less affected by swinging emotions and stopped overthinking.**

**Later meditation felt harder, less potent and I procrastinated.** Contrary to what you might think, meditation isn't anything like sleep - it requires constant focus and sometimes feels quite tiring. 