I haven't published anything here for a while because my mind has been in other places creatively and intellectually, but ultimately life just gets in the way. As my driving instructor says "Life is unfair, Tim. Entropy prevails."

**What am I writing about?**

- **Things that appear easy on the surface but require more investment.**
  - **Finding new interests is about finding a balance between things you're good at and that you enjoy.**
  - **Most things that are worth doing require practice.**
- **Have you ever felt compelled to bring a piece to life?**

I think most people to spend any considerable amount of time doing something must believe they're good at it, at least at first. It's rare to slog away at something for years thinking you're bad, but then again many creative processes are inherently fun. I'm not an accomplished painter (and it wouldn't be the first thing I'd talk about at a dinner party) but I enjoy applying paint to canvas, mixing colours and textures.

I first took up photography as a teenager because I thought it was easy, or on the surface had the appearance of something that was easy. My early explorations with a compact digital camera allowed me to document all the things and happenings in my life, and eventually the people around me. While in my late teens I became somewhat technically proficient at taking pictures, my camera became the main outlet for my creativity. Unfortunately, the school I attended didn't have a photography department so it was very much a solitary pursuit.

At the age of eighteen I wrote to the photographer Alec Soth asking for advice and he very kindly sent back some of his zines, telling me, "...all I can say is that I had [the same] fear of photographing strangers. For me, photography is like therapy. So I encourage you to go out and give it a shot. Hell, come to Minnesota and take my picture." I imagined making photographs like the other young artists I admired (Olivia Bee especially) but learned that in order to make art that truly resonated emotionally with others, I needed to connect with my subjects and subject matter on a deeper level. There's a stunning photograph of a young couple in Vanessa Winship's "She Dances on Jackson" forever imprinted on my brain; I can't imagine what she said to them beforehand to illicit those poses/expressions [1]. Forming a deeper relationship with my subjects would require a considerable amount of time (and a living) so I could undertake projects, neither of which I had. My father wouldn't let me train to become a photographer (because he thought it was oversubscribed) so I went to university to become a TV cameraman instead and left after a year.

While I don't *make* pictures so often these days (I take the odd snapshot on my phone here and there) I can still visualise the process, framing beautiful scenes, natural light. I rifle through old slides and see only the frayed edges of what might have been, but I suspect if I pursued photography as a hobby it would be some time before I could think of myself as being "good" again. There's something here to be said about self-criticism as we get older: it's easy to forget that becoming good at anything new takes time. I probably think of my teenage photographs as having been better than they were for this reason. Perhaps the best is yet to come?

Being so out of practice in the mind is like being unfit in the body: when I haven't been running (from illness, for example) I usually find it takes the same amount of training that I wasn't, to get back to where I was before (a comparable pace/time). Taking good photographs is about training your brain to think a certain way: you *hunt* for the perfect image until it becomes instinctive. That's why I can visualise the process (like imagining myself running without putting on my trainers and going outside). Training your brain like this feels quite tiresome when you don't have a camera on your person (your running shoes) so you do, always. But these days I feel taking my phone out of my pocket takes me too far out of the experience I'm having: I can't be present if my mind is searching for light, for angles, for the corners of a flat plane on the scene I'm looking at. In my mind, *taking* pictures nowadays feels not like an exploration of space but a flattening, a reduction.

I wish I could say I've always thought of photographs as being an effective way to tell stories. I see *series* of photographs as being more analogous to poetry anthologies than I do novels. There are certainly ways of sequencing photographs that communicate meaning (Soth has spoken about this extensively) but single photographs will always be (in my mind) "incomplete": they create the illusion of presenting the world as it "is", but are merely an opinionated representation. I think that's part of the appeal to artists; what's not said can almost be as moving as that which is, though there are lots of successful photographic series' that tell a more "complete" story (like the wonderful "The Epilogue", by Leia Abril.) 

This year I read "Spring Cannot Be Cancelled" about the painter David Hockney in which the author writes, "Just as the camera does not see space or sunsets as the human eye and brain perceive them, neither does it register the colours of flowers in the way that we experience them. That is why photographing a spring meadow, for example, is a frustrating business. Where you see a mass of wild blooms - red, yellow, blue, and white - the lens minimizes these hues and records mainly grass and leaves". Teenage me would have likely argued to the bitter end against this but now I see the truth in it. Hockney later says, "Photographs of sunsets are always clichés. That's because they show just one moment."

I started writing poetry earlier this year because on the surface it too appeared easy. You can write a half-decent-sounding ten-line poem in an afternoon on the back of a postcard and send it to your girlfriend. Much like photography, you get the instant satisfaction of having created something; even better when it rhymes or there's a patter. Much like making pictures, when you get into the habit of writing poems more often you train your brain to notice, you listen out for sayings and expressions and words that roll off the tongue and that pique your interest. But like photography you have to be very aware that your bar of what is "good" quickly rises and you may decide that everything you'd written up to a certain point is a load of rubbish. Don't. It's all part of the ongoing flow of the body of "work" you're making.

I find poetry interesting because often its "true" form doesn't emerge until you've already written some or all of it. Not like painting where usually the piece follows the direction of those first strokes [2]. And certainly not like photography, where a bad photograph will always remain a bad photograph. **TODO**

Reading the poetry of others (or listening, to Poetry Please on Sunday) is a whole other kind of education. "Wait, I can write poems in the third person?", you lament. It's easy to write terribly self-interested poetry: How can you hope to connect with others if you only ever write about your own experiences? If you see nothing but yourself? In his Masterclass the poet Billy Collins says "What you have to do in your poetry is tell a little white lie... that you love poetry more than you love yourself".

**MORE**

I find a lot of people who don't write code perceive it to be some incredibly complex skill but most of us with just a couple of years experience know there are simple patterns; we're hunting for cues just as a photographer or poet does, but instead of light, colour and contrast, we look for so-called "abstractions" and they're common or there are equivalents across most programming languages. I used to work with a guy who insisted on using a green and black terminal theme (it was probably just default iTerm) because non-technical colleagues would walk past his desk and jokingly say things like "are you in the Matrix?" even though I knew he was just doing trivial git stuff. I think he liked being seen that way a bit [3].

With coding I find flow more than anything, with the right balance of ease (I'm relatively good at it now) with challenge (discovering new things, possibly even about myself). As long as neither is too great, my trajectory is always upward, ideally at a constant rate. But life isn't really like this: the rate at which we learn varies greatly. Sometimes I find coding quite addictive because you get lots of little bursts of success: you write some code here, you tweak it there, you write a little more. With each successful build or page refresh you feel the reward of your efforts: It's nothing like say learning an instrument in this regard where it might be months before you feel flow, which is probably why the piano I bought during lockdown collects dust.

[1] I don't have permission to share this image but it appears on this page: https://sites.barbican.org.uk/vanessawinship/. I have fond a fond memory of buying the last copy of "She Dances on Jackson" at Claire de Rouen books (a lovely little art bookshop, when it was in Charing Cross Rd) after seeing the Patrick Caulfield/Gary Hume exhibition at the Tate Britain. Years later I bought Paul Graham's "The Whiteness of the Whale" at Koenig Books (just across the road, now also closed) after seeing William Eggleston at the Tate Modern with my sister.

[2] In "The Art Spirit" Robert Henri says, "The value of repeated studies of *beginnings* of a painting cannot be over-estimated. Those who cannot begin do not finish." I think about this often.

[3] Funnily enough, thinking programming was "what smart people do" is one of the reasons I took it up in the first place; I had watched "The Internship" with Owen Wilson and Vince Vaugn and decided I was going to learn how to code and work at Google, having thought I wasn't particularly clever up to that point. (We were all young and naïve once.) I've met some stupid people who code but most are, unsurprisingly, pretty clever (including "the iTerm guy", now one of my closest friends). We still argue today about a piece of code we originally had an argument about back in 2016. All one of us needs to say is "single letter variables".